Wiki restructuring - CI environment (#1229)
Azure/ResourceModules: docs/wiki/The CI environment - Deployment validation.md

This section provides an overview of the principles the deployment validation is built upon, how it is set up, and how you can interact with it.

- [Deployment validation steps](#deployment-validation-steps)
    - [Template validation](#template-validation)
    - [Azure deployment validation](#azure-deployment-validation)
        - [Output example](#output-example)
    - [Resource removal](#removal)
        - [How it works](#how-it-works)
        - [Create a specialized removal procedure](#create-a-specialized-removal-procedure)
- [Verify the deployment validation of your module locally](#verify-the-deployment-validation-of-your-module-locally)

<img src=".\media\CIEnvironment\deploymentValidationStep.png" alt="Deployment Validation Step" height="500">

# Deployment validation steps

> The deployment validation phase can in turn be divided into three steps, running in sequence:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The deployment validation phase can be divided into three steps, running in sequence:
```

> - Template validation: Tests the module template is valid before the actual deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Template validation:** Tests the module template is valid before the actual deployment.
```

> - Azure deployment validation: Performs the actual Azure deployments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Azure deployment validation:** Performs the actual Azure deployments.
```

> - Resource removal: Deletes deployed resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Resource removal:** Deletes deployed resources.
```

# Template validation

> The template validation step executes a dry-run with each parameter file provided & configured for a module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The template validation step executes a dry-run with each parameter file in the module's `'.parameters'` folder
```

> In particular, the step executes a `Test-AzDeployment` cmdlet (_the command may vary based on the template schema_) with each provided module parameter file to verify if the template would be able to be deployed using them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In particular, the step executes a `Test-AzDeployment` cmdlet (_the command may vary based on the template schema_) for each provided module parameter file to verify if the template would be able to be deployed using them.
```

The intention of this test is to **fail fast**, before getting to the later deployment step. The template validation could fail either because the template is invalid, or because any of the parameter files is configured incorrectly.

# Azure deployment validation

> This step performs the actual Azure deployments using each available & configured module parameter file. The purpose of this step is to prove the module can be deployed in different configurations based on the different input provided. Deployments for the different variants happen in parallel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This step performs the actual Azure deployments using each available & configured module parameter file. The purpose of this step is to prove the module can be deployed in different configurations based on the different parameters provided. Deployments for the different variants happen in parallel.
```

The parameter files used in this stage should ideally cover as many configurations as possible to validate the template flexibility, i.e. to verify that the module can cover multiple scenarios in which the same Azure resource may be used. Using the example of a CosmosDB module we may want to have one parameter file for the minimum amount of required parameters, one parameter file for each CosmosDB type to test individual configurations and at least one parameter file testing the supported extension resources such as RBAC & diagnostic settings.

> **Note**: Since every customer environment might be different due to applied Azure Policies or security policies, modules might behave differently and naming conventions need to be verified beforehand.

### Output example

<img src=".\media\CIEnvironment\deploymentValidationOutput.png" alt="Deployment Validation Output" height="400">

## Resource removal

This paragraph describes how the removal of resources deployed by a module is performed and how to modify the default behavior if a specific module or resource type needs it.

> The removal step is triggered after the deployment completes. It takes care of removing all resources deployed as part of the previous deployment step. The reason is twofold:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The removal step is triggered after the deployment completes. It removes all resources deployed in the previous deployment step. The reason is twofold:
```

- Make sure to keep the validation subscription cost as low as possible.
- Allow test deployments from scratch at every run.

However, the removal step can be skipped in case further investigation on the deployed resource is needed. This can be controlled when running the module pipeline leveraging [Module pipeline inputs](./The%20CI%20environment%20-%20Pipeline%20design#module#module-pipeline-inputs).

### How it works

> The removal process will remove all resources created during deployment. The list is identified by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The removal process will remove all resources created by the deployment. The list of resources is identified by:
```

> 1. Recursively fetching the list of resource IDs created through your deployment (resources created by deployments created by the parent one will be fetched too).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Recursively fetching the list of resource IDs created in the deployment (identified via the used deployment name).
```

1. Ordering the list based on resource IDs segment count (ensures child resources are removed first. E.g. `storageAccount/blobServices` comes before `storageAccount` as it has one more segments delimited by `/`).

> 1. Filtering out from the list any resource used as dependencies for different modules (e.g. the commonly used Log Analytics workspace).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Filtering out resources used as dependencies for different modules from the list (e.g. the commonly used Log Analytics workspace).
```

1. Moving specific resource types to the top of the list (if a certain order is required). For example `vWAN` requires its `Virtual Hubs` to be removed first, even though they are no child-resources.

> After a resource is removed (this happens after each resource in the list), the script will execute, if defined, a **post removal operation**. This can be used for those resource types that requires a post processing, like purging a soft-deleted key vault.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After a resource is removed (this happens after each resource in the list), the script will execute, if defined, a **post removal operation**. This can be used for those resource types that requires a post-processing, like purging a soft-deleted key vault.
```

> The procedure is initiated by the script `/utilities/pipelines/resourceRemoval/Initialize-DeploymentRemoval.ps1`, run during deployment by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The procedure is initiated by the script `/utilities/pipelines/resourceRemoval/Initialize-DeploymentRemoval.ps1` run after deployment by:
```

- (Azure DevOps) `/.azuredevops/pipelineTemplates/jobs.validateModuleDeployment.yml`
- (GitHub) `/.github/actions/templates/validateModuleDeployment/action.yml`

> It uses several helper scripts that can be found in the `/utilities/pipelines/resourceRemoval/helper` folder

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It uses several helper scripts that can be found in its `helper` sub-folder
```

### Create a specialized removal procedure

> This paragraph is intended for CARML contributors who are willing to add a new module to the library. It contains instructions on how to operate with the removal scripts in case a customized removal is needed for any specific resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This paragraph is intended for CARML contributors who want to add a new module to the library. It contains instructions on how to customize the removal scripts if needed for any specific resource.
```

> The default removal procedure works fine for most of the modules created so far, so it's likely you won't have to change anything to make the module you're editing to be removed correctly after deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default removal procedure works for most of the modules. As such it is unlikely you'll have to change anything to enable your new module for removal post-deployment.
```

> You can define a custom removal procedure by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, if you need to, you can define a custom removal procedure by:
```

> 1. influencing the **order** in which resources are removed by prioritizing specific resource types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Influencing the **order** in which resources are removed by prioritizing specific resource types
```

    > **Example** Removing a _Virtual WAN_ resource requires related resources to be deleted in a specific order

> 1. defining a **custom removal action** to remove a resource of a _specific resource type_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Defining a **custom removal action** to remove a resource of a _specific resource type_
```

>     > **Example** A _Recovery Services Vault_ resource requires some protected items to be identified and removed beforehand

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    > **Example** A _Recovery Services Vault_ resource requires some protected items to be identified and removed before the vault itself can be removed
```

1. defining a custom **post-removal action** to be run after removing a resource of a _specific resource type_
    > **Example** A _Key Vault_ resource needs to be purged when soft deletion is enforced

Those methods can be combined independently.

> > **Important**: _custom_ and _post-removal_ actions will be executed when a resource of the type you specify is removed **regardless** of which deployment triggered the deployment. Make sure you do not assume the resource is in a particular state defined by your module.

Reviewer: I don't really understand is paragraph

Author: Would you agree to remove that then?

To modify the resource types removal **order**:
1. Open the `/utilities/pipelines/resourceRemoval/Initialize-DeploymentRemoval.ps1` file.
1. Look for the following comment: `### CODE LOCATION: Add custom removal sequence here`

> 1. Add a case value that matches your module name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Add a case value that matches your resource type
```

1. In the case block, update the `$removalSequence` variable value to accommodate your module requirements
1. Remember to add the `break` statement.

To define a **custom removal** action:
1. Open the `/utilities/pipelines/resourceRemoval/helper/Invoke-ResourceRemoval.ps1` file.
1. Look for the following comment: `### CODE LOCATION: Add custom removal action here`

> 1. Add a case value that matches the resource type you want to modify the removal action for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Add a case value that matches the resource type you want to customize the removal action for
```

1. In the case block, define the resource-type-specific removal action

To add a **post-removal** step:
1. Open the `/utilities/pipelines/resourceRemoval/helper/Invoke-ResourcePostRemoval.ps1` file.
1. Look for the following comment: `### CODE LOCATION: Add custom post-removal operation here`
1. Add a case value that matches the resource type you want to add a post-removal operation for

> 1. In the case block, define the resource-type-specific post removal action

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the case block, define the resource-type-specific post-removal action
```

# Verify the deployment validation of your module locally

> This paragraph is intended for CARML contributors or more generally for those leveraging the CARML CI environment and having the need to update or add a new module to the library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This paragraph is intended for CARML contributors or more generally for those leveraging the CARML CI environment and want to update or add a new module to the library.
```

> Refer to the below snippet to optionally leverage the 'Test-ModuleLocally.ps1' script and verify if your module will comply with the deployment validation step before pushing to source control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can leverage the below snippet to leverage the 'Test-ModuleLocally.ps1' script to verify if your module will comply with the deployment validation step before pushing to source control.
```

```powershell
#########[ Function Test-ModulesLocally.ps1 ]#############
$pathToRepository = '<pathToClonedRepo>'
. "$pathToRepository\utilities\tools\Test-ModuleLocally.ps1"

# REQUIRED INPUT FOR TESTING
$TestModuleLocallyInput = @{

>     templateFilePath              = "$pathToRepository\arm\Microsoft.Authorization\roleDefinitions\deploy.bicep"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    templateFilePath              = '<Path to a module deploy.bicep>'
    parameterFilePath            = '<Optional path to a module parameter.json>'
```
